Instructor: Let's look
at how to use volume
and filter effects
and EarSketch script
with setEffect
and effects envelopes.
We start our script
in the usual way
with the init() function,
setting our tempo
to 120 beats per minute,
and then we have
a fitMedia() function here—
we're just placing a clip
from the EarSketch
sound library on track 1
starting at the beginning
of measure 1,
ending at measure 9.
This gives us some sounds
that we can work with,
that we can add effects to.
So let's hear what that sound
sounds like with no effects.
[electronic notes
ascending and descending]
Okay.
Now before we actually start
with the setEffect() calls,
I'm defining
some variables here—
pointA, pointB, pointC,
D, E, and F—
to represent particular measure
locations on my timeline
where I want to start
or end effects envelopes.
This helps a lot in terms
of keeping track of where
these points are—
enabling me to change them
later if I need to tweak them.
And also, helping me
reuse these more than once
if I need to use them in more
than one effects envelope.
So pointA is
the beginning of measure 1;
pointB is the beginning
of measure 4;
pointC is 6.5,
which is halfway between
the start of measure 6
and the start of measure 7;
pointD, measure 7;
pointE halfway between
the start of measure 8
and the start of measure 9;
and pointF,
the start of measure 9.
So now let's go ahead
and enable this first
setEffect() call here
on track 1, which is
the only track I have
any sound on.
The effect name is FILTER
and the effect parameter
I'm manipulating
is the frequency
of that filter—FILTER_FREQ.
Now this envelope is going
to go from pointA—
that's measure 1—
to pointB, measure 4.
And it's going to start
at 20 hertz, which is
the lowest possible value
I can give to this filter,
so it's going to be
extremely dark.
And then, it's going to end
at 10,000 hertz.
Remember we can vary
this filter frequency
from 20 up to 20,000
so it's not all the way
to the maximum,
but it's up quite a bit.
So what we'll hear
is this filter sweep going from
and extremely dark sound
that's gradually getting
brighter and brighter
from measure 1 to measure 4.
I can run this, we can see
the effect envelope here
ramping up from 20 hertz
all the way up to 10,000 hertz
and then we can hear
that filter sweep as well.
[electronic notes
ascending and descending]
So now let's use some additional
setEffect() calls with
the volume effect to create
some fade-ins and fade-outs.
So let's look at this first
setEffect() call here.
Again, on track 1,
the effect is VOLUME,
the parameter is GAIN—
that's how much I'm increasing
or decreasing the volume by.
And we're starting
at -10 decibels,
going up to 0 decibels—
and remember 0 is the
original volume of the sound—
doing that from pointB,
measure 4,
up to pointC, measure 6.5.
And so if we run this,
we see another effects lane
showing up here for VOLUME-GAIN
and we can see from measure 4
up to half way between 6 and 7,
a slight increase there
from -10 up to 0.
Now, if I uncomment
the next line here we can see
that we're starting a fade-out—
going from 0 back down to -10
starting at pointD, measure 7,
pointE, 8.5.
And if I run, you can see
that fadeout here from 7 to 8.5.
But that doesn't get me
down silence and it doesn't
get me all the way to measure 9,
so I'm going to add one more
setEffect() call here that goes
from pointE at 8.5 to pointF,
measure 9, going from -10
all the way to -60 which is
the lowest decibels I can give
to a VOLUME-GAIN
in EarSketch which
represents basically silence.
So if I run with that
last envelope on that
last part of the fade-out
you can see it comes down
very quickly and sharply there
to bring me down
to silence at the very end.
So now we can hear
the whole thing with
the fade-ins and the fade-outs
and the filter sweep.
[electronic notes
ascending and descending]
[music fades out suddenly]